
Dear Brother,
By virtue of the reform of the Roman Curia, it seemed appropriate to me that the Institutions placed at the service of the Holy See with the activities of research and formation on topics relative to Marriage, to Family and to Life, also move forward with a renewal and further development in order to inscribe their action ever more clearly on the horizon of mercy.
For this purpose, knowing your sound preparation and your vast experience in this field, matured in these years as President of the Pontifical Council for the Family with appreciated spiritual and pastoral fruits, I have decided to entrust you with the Office of Grand Chancellor of the Pontifical John Paul II Institute for Studies on Marriage and Family, in derogation of Art. 6 of the respective Statute, and with that of President of the Pontifical Academy for Life, also distinguishing for you the general direction in this, your task.
As is well known, from the Second Vatican Council until today the Magisterium of the Church on such topics has been developed broadly and in depth. The recent Synod on the Family, with the Apostolic Exhortation 
 
Amoris Laetitia
, further broadened and enhanced the contents. It is my intention that the Institutes placed under your guidance be committed in a renewed way to the enhancement and dissemination of the Magisterium, confronting the challenges of contemporary culture. May the area of reflection be the frontiers; also in theological study may there always be a pastoral perspective and attention to the wounds of humanity. Thus, by appointing you Grand Chancellor of the Pontifical John Paul II Institute for Studies on Marriage and Family, I would like to foster an appropriate development of the Institute’s activity of reflection, research and teaching, in order that it become a privileged setting for helping families to live their vocation and mission in the Church and in the world today.
As President of the Pontifical Academy for Life, I exhort you to engage in the new challenges that concern the value of Life. I refer to the various aspects regarding care of the dignity of the human person in the various ages of life, mutual respect among genders and generations, defence of the dignity of each individual human being, promotion of a quality of human life that integrates material and spiritual value, in the perspective of an authentic “human ecology”, which helps to rediscover the original balance of Creation between the human person and the entire universe.
For this purpose, it will be useful to promote fruitful relationships between the Academy and the John Paul II Institute, so that the activities of one and the other, in faithfulness to the respective aims and methodologies, may proceed in a harmonious manner and in unity of intent. In this perspective, you will strive to foster cordial and effective dialogue with other scientific institutes and academic centres, also in an ecumenical or interreligious setting, both of Christian inspiration and of other traditions and cultures. To stoop to the wounds of man, to understand them, to treat them and to heal them is the task of a Church that is confident in the light and strength of the Risen Christ, able to take on even places of tension and conflict like a “field hospital”, which lives, announces and fulfils her mission of salvation and of healing precisely where the life of individuals is most threatened by the new cultures of competition and of waste.
The two Institutions which you shall oversee are also connected with the new Dicastery for the Laity, the Family and Life, with the awareness that certain subjects will be the concern of the new Dicastery which shall be occupied with pastoral health. Your task, therefore, will have to be carried out in harmony with both Dicasteries, in accordance with the respective competencies and in the spirit of mutual cooperation which guides the activity of the organizations at the service of the Holy See.
Wishing you fruitful work, so that the scientific work of cultural research and of academic formation, which in a special way is entrusted to these two Institutions, may continue to offer its specific contribution, in a harmonious context of the many activities of the Dicasteries of the Roman Curia, I impart to you the Apostolic Blessing.
Vatican City, 15 August 2106Solemnity of the Assumption of Mary Most Holy. 
 
